# COVID-19 and County Health<br/>STAT  471 Final Project<br/>Seokyoon Chang, Jessica Mixon, Maayan Waldman<br/>May 2, 2021

Despite the growing body of research focused on understanding the progression of COVID-19, there is still much to be learned about population-level health factors that make some populations more susceptible to COVID-19 spread, case severity, and mortality. Hence, for our final project, we decided to look into various measures of health across US counties and analyze which factors were most predictive of case fatality rate throughout 2020, the first year of the COVID-19 pandemic. While only analyzing 2020 COVID-19 data only inherently limits our results, we also note 2020 data may actually be most likely to reflect differences in healthcare quality across counties, as it was in the early months of the pandemic that many health systems faced unique issues of resource scarcity.

Our dataset pulled data from two sources: a New York Times time series dataset which includes cumulative counts of COVID-19 cases and deaths at the county level, and data from County Health Rankings & Roadmaps, a program focused on collecting county-level data on a variety of health determinants. For the latter data source, we pulled 2019 or older data from various datasets on their website, as many key variables we wanted to study are still missing for 2020 and we assume that most county-level health determinants stayed very similar from 2019 to 2020. Our explanatory variables span the four main categories of health factors that the program identifies: health behaviors (e.g., smoking, sexual activity), clinical care (e.g., flu vaccine rate), social and economic factors (e.g., unemployment rate), and physical environment (e.g., degree of air pollution). Our primary response variable of interest was deaths per cases, which we created by dividing county-level deaths by count-level cases.

Before exploring our data or running any analyses, we split our data into a training dataset and a test dataset, with the test dataset reserved for assessing and comparing model performance. Then, we explored our data to check for normality assumptions necessary for linear regression and to assess correlations between variables and between variables and the response. In order to build an optimal predictive model, we then built six different cross-validated models: ordinary least squares, ridge regression, LASSO regression, elastic net regression, random forest, and boosting. Of the regression models, elastic net had the lowest test error and of the tree-based models, the boosted model had the lowest test error (as well as the lowest test error overall).

Interestingly, we found that the boosted and elastic net regression both pointed to similar types of variables as the strongest predictors of deaths per cases. Specifically, our optimal boosted model revealed that variables related to residential segregation and unemployment emerged as the most significant predictors, revealing that structural economic and health access inequalities were more predictive of COVID-19 deaths per cases than other variables. We hope that this analysis can inform policies aimed at improving health outcome determinants, both in the context of COVID-19 and more generally going forward. 
